Abstract
Acute graft-versus-host disease (GVHD) occurs after allogeneic hematopoietic stem cell transplant and is a reaction of donor immune cells against host tissues. Activated donor T cells damage host epithelial cells after an inflammatory cascade that begins with the preparative regimen. About 35%– 50% of hematopoietic stem cell transplant (HSCT) recipients will develop acute GVHD. The exact risk is dependent on the stem cell source, age of the patient, conditioning, and GVHD prophylaxis used. Given the number of transplants performed, we can expect about 5500 patients/year to develop acute GVHD. Patients can have involvement of three organs: skin (rash/dermatitis), liver (hepatitis/jaundice), and gastrointestinal tract (abdominal pain/diarrhea). One or more organs may be involved. GVHD is a clinical diagnosis that may be supported with appropriate biopsies. The reason to pursue a tissue biopsy is to help differentiate from other diagnoses which may mimic GVHD, such as viral infection (hepatitis, colitis) or drug reaction (causing skin rash). Acute GVHD is staged and graded (grade 0-IV) by the number and extent of organ involvement. Patients with grade  III/IV  acute  GVHD  tend  to  have  a  poor  outcome.  Generally  the  patient  is  treated  by optimizing their immunosuppression and adding methylprednisolone. About 50% of patients will have a solid response to methylprednisolone. If patients progress after 3 days or are not improved after 7 days, they will get salvage (second-line) immunosuppressive therapy for which there is currently no standard-of-care. Well-organized clinical trials are imperative to better define second-line therapies for this disease. Additional management issues are attention to wound infections in skin GVHD and fluid/nutrition management in gastrointestinal GVHD. About 50% of patients with acute GVHD will eventually have manifestations of chronic GVHD.

Disease name and synonyms
Acute graft-versus-host disease or acute GVHD.

Definition and diagnostic criteria
Acute graft versus host disease generally occurs after allo-geneic hematopoietic stem cell transplant (HSCT). It is a reaction of donor immune cells against host tissues. The three main tissues that acute GVHD affects are the skin, liver, and gastrointestinal tract.

Clinically, the diagnosis is suspected when a recipient of HSCT develops any or all of the following signs or symp-toms: dermatitis (skin rash), cutaneous blisters, crampy abdominal pain with or without diarrhea, persistent nau-sea and vomiting, hepatitis (with elevation of bilirubin and/or liver enzymes). Typically, these symptoms occur before day 100 after the HSCT, but may occur later. Symp-toms most frequently start with donor engraftment, but may happen later. Acute GVHD is a clinical diagnosis but, as many the symptoms of acute GVHD are non-specific, histologic confirmation, especially if the symptoms are atypical or involve just the liver or gut, may be extremely useful.

Acute GVHD is staged by the number and extent of organ involvement. The current staging system was devised in 1994 (table 1) [1]. Recent data support the use of the grad-ing system since it is able to subdivide patients into risk categories for complications and mortality. In this system, patients are divided into one of four grades (I-IV) depend-ing  on  the  degree,  or  stage,  of  involvement  in  three organs.  The  skin  is  staged  with  percent  body  surface involved, the liver is staged with degree of bilirubin eleva-tion, and the gastrointestinal tract is staged with amount of diarrhea. Using the criteria (table 1), a single grade is assigned to each patient.

There is a similar grading system devised by the Interna-tional Bone Marrow Transplant Registry (IBMTR). This sytem tries to diminish interobserver variability in GVHD grading. The system assigns one of four risk categories (A-D) to each patient with acute GVHD. It is still unknown whether one system is better at predicting outcome of patients with acute GVHD.

Epidemiology
In 2003, 13,700 allogeneic HSCTs were reported to the Center for International Blood and Marrow Transplant Research (CIBMTR). The incidence of grade II-IV acute GVHD is roughly 35%–50%. The risk of GVHD increases with  the  use  of  unrelated  donors,  mismatched  donor, older age of the donor, mutliparous female donor, older age of the recipient, graft type (cord blood has a lower rate than marrow or peripheral blood stem cells), and certain conditoning regimens. Given the current ratio of related versus   unrelated   donor   transplants   performed   yearly (almost  2:1),  we  can  expect  about  5500  patients  to develop grade II-IV acute GVHD per year.

Clinical description
The clinical manifestations of acute GVHD represent the organs involved. The earliest and most common manifes-tation is skin GVHD. This is essentially a maculopapular rash that can begin anywhere in the body but often starts with palm and sole involvement. The patient may com-plain of pruritus or tenderness in affected areas. The onset of the rash normally correlates with engraftment of donor cells. The timing of engraftment depends on stem cell source (faster with peripheral blood stem cells) and inten-sity  of  preparative  regimen.  Patients  receiving  reduced intensity regimens, which do not result in marrow abla-tion, often have a later onset of GVHD. This is due both to the later engraftment and the damage from the prepara-tive regimen producing cytokines that drive the immune responses   resulting   in   clinical   GVHD.   As   the   rash progresses, it may become confluent. In severe cases, blis-ters   may   occur.   The   gastrointestinal   manifestations include diarrhea which may become bloody, cramping, nausea, vomiting and failure to thrive [2]. Furthermore, jaundice from hyperbilirubinemia is the hallmark of liver GVHD [3], although a hepatitic variant of GVHD with a rise in liver enzymes like an acute viral hepatitis, has been recognized [4,5]. While acute GVHD is a clinical diagno-sis, there are other conditions that can mimic or coexist with GVHD, such as drug toxicity (especially common in patients post transplant on multiple antimicrobial agents, immunosuppressive drugs, hyperalimentation, receiving methotrexate, etc.) and infection. For example, the symp-toms of cytomegalovirus (CMV) colitis (diarrhea, abdom-inal pain) may be very similar to those of acute GVHD. Therefore, it is recommended to obtain a biopsy to con-firm clinical suspicion whenever possible. Finally, while the definition of acute GVHD is well-accepted as involv-ing  three  organs, certain  post-transplant  complications may be related to or actually represent GVHD. For exam-ple,  a  few  patients  develop  non-infectious  pulmonary infiltrates upon engraftment and the outcome is generally poor.  Animal  models  suggest  that  the  immunologic

Table 1: Extent of organ involvement
Stage	Skin
0	No GVHD rash
1	Maculopapular rash< 25% BSA
2	Maculopapular rash 25 – 50% BSA 3	Maculopapular rash > 50% BSA
4	Generalized erythroderma plus bullous formation
Grade
I	Stage 1–2 II	Stage 3 or III	-
IV	Stage 4 or

Liver (bilirubin)

< 2 mg/dl 2–3 mg/dl
3.1–6 mg/dl 6.1–15 mg/dl >15 mg/dl

None Stage 1 or
Stage 2–3 or Stage 4

Gut (stool output/day)

< 500 ml/day or persistent nausea. 500–999 ml/day
1000–1500 ml/day Adult: >1500 ml/day
Severe abdominal pain with or without ileus

None Stage 1 Stage 2–4 -

Etiology
The pathophysiology of acute GVHD has been described by Ferrara and colleagues as a three-phase phenomenon [7,8]. Please refer to figure 1. The first involves damage to host tissues by inflammation from the preparative chemo-and/or radio-therapy regimen. In the second phase, both recipient and donor antigen-presenting cells (APCs) as well as inflammatory cytokines triggering the activation of donor-derived T cells, which expand and differentiate into effector cells [9]. In this activation phase, minor histo-compatibility antigens play a central role, particularly in the setting of matched sibling transplantations.

T-cell activation pathways result in the transcription of genes for cytokines, such as IL-2 and interferon. T cells that produce IL-2 and interferon are considered to be of the Th1 phenotype, compared to T cells that produce pre-dominantly IL-4, IL-5, IL-10, and IL-13, which define the Th2 phenotype, that are felt to modulate GVHD [10].

In the third phase, the effector phase, activated donor T cells mediate cytotoxicity against target host cells through Fas-Fas ligand interactions, perforin-granzyme B, and the additional production of cytokines, such as TNF-α TNF-α is produced mainly by monocytes and macrophages, and secondarily  by  T  lymphocytes  and  natural  killer  cells. TNF-α  has been implicated in the pathophysiology of GVHD at several steps in the process, including induction of apoptosis in target tissues through the TNF-α receptor; activation  of  macrophages,  neutrophils,  eosinophils,  B cells, and T cells; stimulating production of additional inflammatory cytokines (IL-1, IL-6, IL-10, IL-12, and TNF-α itself); increased expression of HLA; and the facilitation of T-lymphocyte lysis. High levels of TNF-α  also have been associated with an increased incidence of GVHD in bone marrow transplantation (BMT) recipients. This allo-geneic interaction in the setting of cytokine dysregulation leads to the tissue damage characteristic of acute GVHD [9,11-15].

Risk factors
Genetic basis of acute GVHD
Major histocompatibility antigens (or Human leukocyte antigens – HLA) are located on the short arm of chromo-some 6 at the p21 position in humans [16,17]. The major histocompatibility complex (MHC) is a closely linked, highly polymorphic multi-gene and multi-allelic complex playing   the   critical   role   in   both   cell-mediated   and humoral immune responses. HLA class I antigens (HLA-A, HLA-B,  and  HLA-C)  have  a  wide  distribution  and  are found on all nucleated cells. HLA class II antigens (DR, DQ, and DP) are generally found on the cells involved in the immune response. CD4 T cells recognize foreign anti-gens by the presentation of class II HLA molecules. Inter-estingly, class II HLA products are particularly induced on the skin and intestinal tract epithelial tissues, they may promote specific targeting during acute GVHD. Matching BMT recipients with sibling donors sharing identical HLA antigens  improves  engraftment  and  decreased  GVHD compared to mismatched siblings. However, acute GVHD is  seen  in  matched  sibling  pairs-demonstrating  factors contribute to the immune reaction. Minor histocompati-bility antigens (miH) are peptides derived fromintracellu-lar proteins presented by MHC molecules to donor T cells. Perhaps the best known of these are the minor antigens from products from the Y chromosome. Alloreactivity in the setting of matched siblings then involves the recogni-tion of different nonself peptides bound in the T cell receptor and carried by the recipient MHC. Following the presentation of miH (foreign peptide) by MHC to donor T cell, i.e., CD4 in the context of MHC class II and CD8 in class I, the presence of nonself peptide bound to the MHC molecules  trigger  the  T  cell  and  induction  of  GVHD occurs. Current research is focused on identification of additional non-MHC antigens that trigger alloreactivity.

With the ability to molecularly type the extensive HLA region, it became evident that much more of the HLA region had to be considered for optimal unrelated donor selection. This is an area of explosive development, with almost 200 new alleles identified each year. A detailed review of the intricacies of the HLA system and selection of donors is beyond the scope of this paper. There are several recent excellent reviews [16,17]. However, a few guid-ing principles can be stated. The most important is that it is critical to have an experienced transplant immunoge-neticist review all genetic data. Second, regions that were not appreciated to have a role in GVHD (plus engraftment and graft-versus-leukemia, GVL) in the matched sibling transplants are clearly important in the unrelated/mis-matched family donor. For example, the HLA-C and HLA-DQ regions are routinely typed when looking for an alter-native  donor  (the  so  called  10  antigen  match).  More recently, HLA-DP and HLA linked NK cell typing has been shown to play a role in the GVHD/GVL equations. Inter-estingly, data collected on unrelated donor transplants indicates, there is evidence that certain allelic mismatches are „permissible“-that is, although the alleles are molecu-larly different, the actual immune consequences are mod-est to undetectable. It is also increasingly apparent that the balance of GVH/GVL is shifted by the intensity of the pre-parative regimen-so that the best match for an unrelated donor transplant receiving a full preparative regimen may be different from that in a non-myeloablative setting. The complexities of the HLA system demonstrate why it is crit-ical to have the input of an experienced transplant immu-nogeneticist.

Other risk factors
The risk factors for acute GVHD are well defined. As dis-cussed above, the most important factor is HLA disparity. Among siblings, patients receiving matched grafts have lower rates of GVHD than those receiving one, two or three antigen mismatch grafts. For unrelated donor trans-plants, the greater the degreeofHLA-mismatch, the higher the likelihood is of developing acute GVHD and the worse the  overall  outcome  [18-20].  Recent  data  from  the National Marrow Donor Program suggests that matching at the allele level (high-resolution) as opposed to only at the antigen (low-resolution) level provides advantage in reducing the likelihood of GVHD. The incidence of seri-ous (grade III/IV) acute GVHD is about 30% with a fully matched (8/8) unrelated donor but is 40% with 1 or 2 allelic mismatches at class I [21,22]. This compares to about a 20% incidence of serious acute GVHD for recipi-ents of HLA-identical sibling transplants [23].

As for the source of the graft, unrelated cord blood has become an important alternative stem cell source and has some  unique  properties.  The  immunologic  naiveté  of these stem cells allows for greater degrees of mismatch; recipients of mismatched (4/6 or 5/6 HLA group match) unrelated cord blood appear to have similar incidence of acute GVHD and similar overall outcome as compared to matched-sibling transplants [24]. There is increasing use of peripheral blood stem cell (PBSC)as a way of collecting cells from related or unrelated donors. No randomized study has been completed to determine if PBSC transplants  change  GVHD  incidence  or  eventual  outcome. However, there is a suggestion from a meta-analysis that acute GVHD is slightly increased (RR 1.16) and chronic GVHD is increased (RR 1.53) when comparing PBSC to bone marrow transplants [25]. Higher doses of CD34+ cells in the PBSC product correlate with more GVHD [26]. It is still debated whether the increase in GVHD will trans-late  to  improved  outcome  due  to  higher  graft-versus-leukemia effect or worse outcome due to higher trans-plant-related-mortality.  Some  groups  have  used  T-cell depletion which decreases the risk of acute GVHD [27-29]. However, this approach has led to an increased inci-dence of graft failure and slower immune reconstitution. Clinically  this  has  translated  to  more  infection  and relapse.

Other factors can also increase the likelihood of acute GVHD. Older age of both recipient anddonor increase the probability of GVHD [30]. Sex mismatch, specifically a multiparous female donor into a male patient, increases the likelihood of GVHD [31]. Furthermore, the intensity of the preparative regimen does appear to correlate with more acute GVHD. This effect may occur to more tissue damage from the preparative regimen predisposing these tissues to more inflammation from the alloreactive cells. Higher doses of radiation do give rise to more GVHD [32], and the more recent use of nonmyeloablative preparative regimens has led to lower incidence of acute GVHD in some studies [33-35].

Diagnostic methods
Acute GVHD is usually suspected based on the clinical presentation. A biopsy can be used to confirm the diagno-sis and should be used when there are competing diag-noses,  such  as  infection  and  drug  reaction,  in  the differential. Skin biopsies can show dyskeratotic keratino-cytes, lymphocyte exocytosis, basal cell necrosis, deple-tion of Langerhans cells, and satellite lymphocytes next to the dyskeratotic keratinocytes. All findings are not neces-sarily present in every skin biopsy and histology is not always pathognomonic [36]. Typically, endoscopy of the gastrointestinal tract reveals edema, mucosal sloughing and  possibly  bleeding.  Most  typically  these  would  be found in the cecum, ileum and colonbut also may involve the upper intestinal tract. Histopathology shows crypt-cell necrosis and dropout with crypt absecess [37]. Pathology of liver GVHD can show early cytotoxic lymphocyte attack on bile ducts to bizzare, irregular bile ducts, depending on the timing of the biopsy vis a vis the duration of liver GVHD prior to the biopsy. Epithelial cells can be flattened with   some   missing   nuclei.   Other   nuclei   are   often enlarged, irregular, and hyperchromatic. Bile duct apopto-sis and endothelialitis can also be seen [38].

Management
Currently, most centers use a combination of an immu-nophilin (cyclosporine or tacrolimus) with short course methotrexate.   Although   other   regimens   are   being explored, this particular regimen has been shown repeat-edly to result in a reasonable balence of GVHD and graft versus-tumor in matched sibling transplants after ablative chemotherapy [39,40]. For higher risk groups or groups receiving non-conventional grafts (such as mismatched donors, older patients, reduced intensity regimens, etc.), the best prophylaxis is less clearly established [41]. Myco-phenolate mofetil (MMF) is often used in reduced inten-sity transplantation for its effect in GVHD prophylaxis as well as promoting engraftment [42]. For patients reciving mismatched grafts, more intensive immunosuppression is usually needed. Methods of ex-vivo T-cell depletion [43] as well as pharmacologic in-vivo T cell depletion (antithymo-cyte globulin, ATG [44], alemtuzumab [45]) have been used to attempt to reduce the incidence of acute GVHD. In general, these methods reduce acute GVHD but increase the incidence of infection (due to delayed reconstitution of the immune system) and the incidence of relapse (due to a decreased graft-versus-leukemia effect).

Once GVHD occurs, all phases of GVHD induction are active. Successful treatment will ultimately need to work on all phases, if the process is to be stopped. Most centers treat grade II-IV acute GVHD by continuing prophylactic immunosuppression and adding methylprednisolone at 2 or 2.5 mg/kg/day. However, starting doses range from 1 to >20 mg/kg/day [46]. Steroids are tapered after control of GVHD. A rapid steroid taper (86 days) is just as effective as a slow taper (147 days) in terms of preventing flares of GVHD or chronic GVHD [47]. A few studies have reported outcomes with high dose methylprednisolone (20 to 50 mg/kg/day). Patients that responded to these doses gener-ally flared after dose reduction, and there were a number of deaths secondary to opportunistic infections [48,49].

There is one randomized trial comparing high and low dose  methylprednisolone  for  the  treatment  of  acute GVHD [50]. Patients receiving 2 mg/kg/day and 10 mg/ kg/day had the same rate of response (70%) and the same 3-year  actuarial  survival  (62%).  Higher  morbidity  was observed with the higher dose. Therefore, there is no com-pelling argument to use the super high dose of steroids. Initial response to steroids, either low-dose or high-dose, is very predictive of future severity of GVHD and other transplant complications. In general, about 40–50% of patients have an overall response to corticosteroids [51].

Patients not responding to corticosteroids are treated with salvage therapy. There is no specific approach that is con-sidered  standard  of  care.  Anti-thymocyte  globulin  has been used, and produces objective responses. However, the long-term survival of patients treated with ATG is low (median survival 4.1 months) given the severe immuno-suppression and high incidence of infection [52]. There are a number of other approaches under investigation. Some of these include extracorporeal photopheresis [53], pentostatin [54,55], sirolimus [56], infliximab[57], and mesenchymal stem cells [58]. In general, a number of these agents produce responses; however, infectious mor-tality  remains  high.  Systematic  investigation  of  dosing and timing of various salvage agents is clearly necessary in well-designed, prospective clinical trials.

While the goal is not to review all potential salvage thera-pies, a few types will be mentioned (Deeg recently pub-lished  an  excellent  review  on  therapies  for  steroid-refractory GVHD [59]). For example, of twenty-two heav-ily-treated  patients  with  steroid-refractory acute  GVHD treated with pentostatin (an irreversible inhibitor of ade-nosine-deaminase) on a phase I trial, seventeen had an objective response. However, five patients that responded died from late infections, either viral or fungal. The sur-vival at one year was 25% [55]. Possibly, employing a sal-vage approach such as this one earlier in the process of acute GVHD may produce an improved outcome.

Monoclonal antibodies such as daclizumab and inflixi-mab have been used to treat GVHD. MD Anderson Cancer Center recently reviewed their experience using infliximab (anti-TNF-α antibody) in 21 patients with steroid-refrac-tory acute GVHD. This was the only drug added to these patients. Sixty-seven percent responded, and there was sig-nificant activity in gastrointestinal GVHD. There was a high rate of infections, particularly fungal and viral. One-year  survival  was  38%  [60].  Another  study  compared patients with steroid-refractory acute GVHD that received infliximab versus those that did not, and found a higher incidence of non-Candida  invasive fungal infections in those receiving infliximab [61]. Thus, while this and other drugs may offer responses to patients with GVHD, it is always important to remember that by far the greatest risk will be increased infectious complications.

Additional issues for patients with GVHD are appropriate management of symptoms. For example, patients with severe gastrointestinal GVHD and diarrhea need careful attention to fluid status, electrolyte management and pro-tein-losing enteropathy. Patients with skin GVHD need to be thoroughly examined for the presence of any open sores or bullae, which may become infected. Since infec-tious complications are so prevalent in these patients, fre-quent  monitoring  of  CMV  PCR  or  antigenemia  and appropriate therapy is important [62]. Published CDC (Centers for Disease Control and Prevention) guidelines for prevention of infection (pneumcystis jirovecii pneumonia, bacterial, fungal, viral) should be closely followed [63].

Prognosis
MacMillan et al. from the University of Minnesota recently published the response of 443 patients with acute GVHD, treated uniformly at their institution. Of the 443 patients (all  treated  with  prednisone),  durable  responses  were obtained in 245 (55%). There was a tendency to lower response if patients begun with a higher grade. Recipients of HLA-mismatched unrelated donor transplants wereless likely to respond. Fifty-three percent of patients were alive at 1 year after initiation of steroid therapy, and 42% of patients  had  developed  chronic  GVHD.  Deaths  were mostly commonly attributed to ongoing GVHD and/or infection [64]. Cahn and colleagues recently reported on a multicenter study comparing the IBMTR and the Glucks-berg scales. Both scales performed similarly. In general, patients with grade C (IBMTR) or grade III (Glucksberg) acute GVHD have about a 30% probability of long-term survival. Those with grade D/grade IV acute GVHD, have under 5% long-term survival. Patients without GVHD or with grade A-B/grade I-II acute GVHD have above 80% probability of long-term survival [65].

It  is  worth  noting  chronic  GVHD  as  over  half  of  the patients with acute GVHD later develop chronic GVHD. Chronic GVHD is a distinct clinical syndrome, although there may be an overlap period, where the pateint has symptoms  of both  acute  and  chornic GVHD.  Chronic GVHD resembles many spontaneously occuring autoim-mune  disorders,  like  scleroderma.  Organs  affected  are most  typically  skin  (lichenoid  and  sclerotic  rashes), mouth, joints, liver, eyes, gastrointestinal tract, and occa-sionally lungs [66]. While chronic GVHD can worsen sur-vival due to more transplant-related mortality (infection from immunosuppression), chronic GVHD can also have a GVL effect. The basic pathophysiology of chronic GVHD is at this point not well defined. Therapy relies on many of the same medications used to treat acute GVHD, but patients  require  prolonged  treatment,  extending  over months to years [67]. Despite the fascinating clinical man-ifestations of chronic GVHD, the most important aspect of chronic GVHD is the significant immune dysfunction associated with the disease itself and its treatment. Infec-tion accounts for the majority of deaths in chronic GVHD patients.

Unresolved questions
Clearly, better immunosuppressive therapies are needed for patients with severe GVHD. In addition, as immuno-suppression is increased in these patients, the risk of infec-tion needs to be carefully weighed. Agents for prevention of acute GVHD and for treatment of steroid-refractory acute GVHD need further investigation. To be able totrulyevaluate the potential clinical benefit of an agent, it needs to be studied in prospective clinical trials. Furthermore, it is imperative to continue investigations on methods of cellular manipulation (selective T cell depletion, alloreac-tive NK cell infusions) that may reduce GVHD while pre-serving the graft-versus-leukemia effect. Since GVHD is clearly the major barrier to successful HSCT, efforts are needed in this specific area. If GVHD outcomes begin to improve, we may see an increase in number of patients being referred for HSCT.
